from hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel
minutes, a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number two 74. Recorded
live Thursday, July 7th, 2011. Support for
Hansel minutes is provided by
Telerik rad controls, the most
comprehensive suite of components for
windows forms and asp.net web
applications online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode,
Scott talks with Eric Meyer about
the notion of JavaScript being
assembly language for the web.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes. And today we're
talking to Eric Meyer. He's a
partner architect on the cloud
programmability team. And I was
talking with Eric on email
a couple of days ago,
and he made a very
wise comment. He said, JavaScript
is an assembly language. What
do you mean by that,
Eric? Well, what I mean
by that is that when
you ride, well, let, let,
let me kind of roll
back a little bit. So
if you look at things
like, you know, dope net
or the JVM, or even
x86 you program in a
high level language that gets
compiled into JVM bite goats
or CLR assemblies or x86
binarys, and you run that.
Now, if you look at
JavaScript, it is in some
sense, this same thing, the
people get confused when they,
she, you know, curly braces
and something that looks like
a high level language, but
really in my view, JavaScript
is that shame as a
JVM bite coats or CLR
assemblies. So you take a
high level language and you
map it down to Java
script, and every browser has
a JavaScript VM. So really
Java script, in some sense,
fulfills the promise of ride
once, run everywhere. But it's
just that, like, if you,
if you disassemble a CLR
assembly or a JVM gloss
file, you get something that
looks like assembler language. And
when you look at JavaScript,
you know, people often see
something that looks like a
high level language, and then
they get confused. But really
they're kind of the same
thing. The, the, the postulate
that I've kind of proposed
in my, in my, in
my blog post on this
topic was that we should
not be looking at the,
what comes down to the
browser for, for reference at
all. Basically it's simply a,
it could be a mess.
It could be a mess
of JavaScript. It could be
a mess of markup. It
really just doesn't matter. And
when I, when I threw
that out there, some people
immediately understood what I meant.
The idea that the development
language, the development environment could
be in any number of,
of, of, of languages, of
development styles, but other people
kind of, I feel confused
the idea of minification and
compression, and I'm not quite
sure how to get people
straight on this. I kind
of felt like the transport
mechanism and the, and the,
and the minimum minification and
the compression is one thing
like HTML is all being
zipped up. And no one,
no one sees that because
when you say view source,
it's being unzipped, but, you
know, help me understand this
idea that, I mean, I'm
talking about more than just
minification and compression. I'm talking
about the, the environment that
you write it in might
not even be HTML and
CSS. That is correct. So
let, let, let's start like
really simple, right? If you
look at Java script and,
you know, you look at
say, you know, popular Brook
JavaScript, the good parts, what
you will see there is
that in order to ride
JavaScript, if you go beyond
simple, you know, both in
click handler or, you know,
simple things like that, you
have to do, do a
lot of boilerplate code. So
in order to simulate namespaces
in order to simulate classes,
in order to do private
fields, there's a lot of
boilerplate code, which is very
similar to assembly code. So
JavaScript has very few primitives.
It has very powerful primitives,
but you have to kind
of build everything from scratch.
And so that's why people
have like a lot of
conventions to ride JavaScript. But
now you can say, well,
why do you ride these
things by hand? Why don't
you have some higher level
language that, that generates those
things? And, and so that's
that this kind of bootstrap
that you get, which is
different than many fication, because
now you're kind of using
a compiler to generate the
boilerplate for you. Now, even
if you look at the
magnification, you can also view
debt as some kind of
compilation where the source language
and the target language are
the same. For example, a
Google has dual gold closure,
which is a JavaScript mini
fire and optimizer, which takes
your JavaScript and, you know,
munches it and kind of,
you know, does all kinds
of things to it just
in very much the same
way as a compiler does.
And the fact that, you
know, the short language and
the target language are the
same. There's not really mattered.
In fact, there's many languages,
for example, hashcode, where the
compiler works exactly like that.
You start out with the
hashcode program and then the
compiler in multiple fascist Sterns,
that's programmed into smaller and
smaller ship sets, or more
efficient a version of your
program. And then in the
end you still have a
valid actual program, but it's
in a, you know, it's
more efficient and in a
smaller subset. And so it's
going to be, you know,
further compiled or is easier
to run or, you know,
whatever. So, so I think
the magnification, if you just
do pure minification and obfuscation,
that's gonna, you know, the
most trivial way of doing
compilation. But I do think
that that's also shows the
fact that people really, you
know, if you, if you
do view shores, the JavaScript
that you see is not
meant for, for human consumption,
it's really meant for the
VM that runs in a
browser to run it. But
don't, don't you think that
the, one of the reasons
that JavaScript was so successful
and why JavaScript took off
was the, the very idea
of used source. I mean,
people have said that, well,
yes, everything should be minified
because it detours D compilation,
but it's really only a
deterrent. It's not a complete
obfuscation solution. It's not like
one would really put their
intellectual property in JavaScript, minify
it. And then think that
it was, they were protected
and all at the same
time, someone said, well, I
could say 50 gigabytes a
month, but if you do
the math, that's like 60 cents
on Amazon. So the, the
bandwidth argument falls down as
well. That seems to be
no good reason other than
maybe perception of speed on
the client to go on
minify JavaScript. And when doing
that, you lose any benefit
of, of teaching the audience.
Yeah. Well, so I think
doing few shores might not
be the best way to
teach people about your program.
So I think that this,
the same, what you see
a lot of people with
Dalton assemblies, for example, or
they kind of use some
tools from decompensation tool. ReSharper,
you know, don't not reflect,
or now ReSharper has a
tool like that to, in
order to understand, you know,
the coat what's going on.
So I think the, the
source code and the code
that you transport to the
machine are two Def different
things. So I think, you
know, if you want people
to, you know, learn from
your coach, why have a
few shorts, why don't you
kind of, you know, have
that go somewhere up with,
you know, Coleman or, you
know, in some GitHub repository
where people can actually download
it and play with it
and there's test case essential.
And I think, you know,
doing view shores is more
an accident of, I don't
know if that was something
that the browsers hats, but,
and then people may use
it to learn about stuff,
but in some sense, that's
the same as, you know,
looking, you know, looking at
as a DLL or something
like that. So I think
you should separate those things
out and the browser, you
know, it loads it's really
think of the browser as
a, it's a regular VM
that loads normally, you know,
things come packages in, in,
in  or in collage
files, the allows. And now
it's gone, you know, as,
as a string, that's got
loaded and executed, but that
string that gets loaded is
not the fact that the
human can look at that
or view shores. I think
that's just an accident. That's
not the purpose of that.
Hmm. That's that's a very
interesting statement that views view
source is an accident. So
there's the issue of combining
and minification and basically post
build steps. Of course, that
prepare stuff for transport. Certainly
we could, you know, zip
up the entire website and
give it a new extension
and, you know, call it.app
or something. And it would
be interesting. And, and it
would run within a little
virtual machine, but taking the
conversation in a slightly different
way. Some, some people in
the, in the comments on
the blog post that I
put up about this, someone
actually about halfway through said,
this is the return of
project Volta. And that's that,
that's something that you were
in involved in. Can you
tell me what that is
and why that person would
bring up project Volta? All
right. Yes. I can definitely
talk about that. So the
idea of Volta was exactly
what I just described. You
look at the Java script
and you say, Oh, well,
that's just one place where
I can execute coats. Just
like x86 is a place
where I can execute goats
or Silverlight, there's a place
where I can execute code
or, you know, they, whatever
targets you have. So what
we did this week to
don't net assemblies and wrote
a jets, just knock your
ride at jet that goes
through x86 or arm. And
we wrote a jitter that
would take that's ill and
Git that into JavaScript. And
so really that literally took
the idea of JavaScript is
in assembly language, through to
its logical conclusion. And there's
really no difference between, you
know, rising a jet that
they ex ill and compiles
it to arm or rising
a Git that takes IOL
and combining it to JavaScript.
And I would even argue
that JavaScript as an assembly
language has a lot of
advantages for the compiler riser,
because it has, it's very,
it's a, like a very
high level assembly language. It
has closures, it has exception
handling. So even though you
have to go out, for
example, the semantics of dotnet
stipes and, you know, construct
our calls and interfaces and
costs and so on. There's
many, many things where you
don't have to go them
in a low level. Let's
take, for example, if you
want to do exceptions, if
you, if you're, if you're
targeting x86, it has no
notion of exceptions. So you
have to go to everything
yourself at the very low
level. When you target JavaScript,
you can, if you're lucky
you can target JavaScript exceptions.
And now you can kind
of layer your acception mechanism
as defined by the aisle
or the match specification and
map that into JavaScript. A
seminar project is, and you
were playing with that too,
as you said, it's, it's
Google GWT where they take
Java and they compile that
to JavaScript and trying to
maintain the semantics of that.
So this, this idea is
why it's a widespread and
other great example. It's a
script sharp. This is a
project that Nickeel, that's here
at Microsoft. It's slightly different
than GWT and Volta. Where
there you take and script
sharp. There's a language as
Syntex that looks like C
sharp, but that's compiled to
JavaScript. So it's, it's like
a new programming language. And
th there's a whole slew
of examples, like that's coffee
script. I think it's at
this point, a very popular
example of that, where you
have like a Python like
syntax and you compile that
into, into JavaScript. And then
there's objective J and you
know, there's, there's many, many,
I think this is the,
the whole thing at the
moment where people are taking
either existing languages and trying
to maintain the semantics of
those languages, mapping them to
JavaScript as an assembly language,
or have a slightly higher,
a slightly higher level language
that maintains much of the
JavaScript, you know, styles, genetics.
Let me give you an
example of where things get
difficult with the ill, or
when you're doing Java, Java
script array are not really
like regular dotnet to race.
You can, you know, put
in a value note at
a numeric index. There's no,
you know, array, bounce jacking.
You can, you know, put
something, you know, you can
access out of bounds elements
and so on. So if
you're trying to maintain the
dotnet as semantics of arrays,
you have to do a
lot of work. And just
like when you're targeting regular
assembler language, you have to
do a lot of work
to, to map the high
level concepts onto the lower
level things. So what people
do is they say, well,
let's try to maintain a
lot of the JavaScript semantics,
but, but put some more
sugar on top. So those
are kind of, I think,
two different approaches where, you
know, either you have an
existing language with its semantics
that you met on through
JavaScript or where you're saying,
well, let's maintain some of
the JavaScript flavor. And, but,
but built a higher level
language on top. This episode
of Hansel minutes is brought
to you by careers. 2.0
careers, 2.0 is a new
service by our friends at
stack overflow. You're probably all
familiar with stack overflow. The
online QA resource dedicated specifically
to programmers and programming related
topics. Well, the team at
stack overflow created careers 2.0
to provide you with access
to great jobs and introduce
you to a bunch of
great companies that you might
consider working for, even if
you're not currently looking for
a job, think of careers.
2.0 is a programmer profile,
gives you a platform to
show that you're awesome by
featuring your proudest contributions to
stack overflow, GitHub SourceForge Bitbucket,
anything programming related, you can
even add your favorite programming
books from amazon.com profiles on
careers. 2.0 are free. They're
easy to get started, especially
by importing your LinkedIn profile.
However, there's one catch profiles
on career 2.0 invite only.
They did this to keep
out the spam and have
a high quality environment. Fortunately,
for you as a Hansel
minutes listener, I've got your
back head on over to
careers dot stack overflow.com/h M
to accept your invitation today,
once again, that's careers dot
stack, overflow.com/h M. I hope
you like it. Why, why
does given how quirky JavaScript
is given how unusual it
is? I mean, people have
said that, that JavaScript just
wasn't designed to kind of
organically grew given that the
JavaScript that I kind of
hated in, in the early
two thousands in the late
nineties is so much different
than the JavaScript today. Some
people feel that JavaScript in
its kind of organic, strange
state is a beautiful thing.
And other people say, well,
this is just offensive. I
have to remember 20 different
hacks in order to use
it. Why not use a
language that was properly designed?
Why not forget about JavaScript?
Why didn't Volta and script
sharp take off. I mean,
they have their fans. I
know that script sharp is
still actively developed. And I
know that there are a
number of projects that have
been written entirely in script
sharp, but I would have
to say that it hasn't
really caught fire. Why not?
Yes. So there, that's a
very good question. I think
there's, there's various answers to
that. I think if you
look at GWT, I think
debts that's, that's very successful.
That's used quite a lot.
And if you look at,
but again, if you, if
you, if you look at
this thing as a, as
a compiler or jet, you
know, Google has like a
large team working on that.
I think, you know, if
you go to the size,
I think there's like about
30 submits or student project.
So you have to do,
do you think of that
in the shame of vein,
as you know, the CLR
team over here at Microsoft,
or maybe the JVM team
over at sonar Oracle now
it's really, you know, you're
right. Or, or the C
sharp team you're really rising
a compiler or jet, which
is not, you know, a
simple thing because you're, it
there's, as I said, there's
no real difference between targeting
arm or x86 or JavaScript.
So it's the amount of
work in order to do
that is pretty significant. Now
what happened, for example, with,
if you look at volt
on, for example, one of
the reactions that people have
is they are looking at
to generate the JavaScript and
they say, Oh my goodness,
that JavaScript Luke's really complex
and complicated. And, you know,
they're then afraid that you're
losing performance and so on.
But what you have to
keep in mind is that
that's complexity is there because
you want to maintain the
semantics of the, of the
CLR. So all that code
that you generate is there
for a reason, it would
be the Shea image. If
you would look at the
output of the CLR jets,
you know, the x86 machine
code and say, wow, that
is complicated machine codes. If
I would write machine code
by hand directly, I do
it much shorter, of course,
but you're not getting the
same, you know, the same
value out of that. So
it's a trade off now
as script sharp Duke and,
and coffee script. And those
things take a more pragmatic
approach where they say, we're
not trying to maintain the
semantics off an existing language,
but we're, we're defining a
new language such that, you
know, the JavaScript that you
generate is not that far
removed from the shortcodes. And
so the kind of the
difference is, is less. So
you're saying, you're saying that
the, the distance that the,
the, the intellectual leap that
has to be made from
what I'm writing to, what
is output it is, is
less, there's more of a,
one to one mapping. It's,
it's not so much the
one to one mapping, but
it's, it's not that you're
let, let, let me say,
let me give you a
concrete example. So in the
CLR, you have abstract based
dives interfaces, inheritance. There's a
certain semantics of how construct
or calls are made. And
in order to maintain that
semantics, you have to, and
JavaScript has approached a dog
based inheritance. So now in
order to, to guarantee the
same semantics as when you're,
you know, when you run
your C sharp program football
through JavaScript or compile to
x86, you have to generate
some fairly or think of
generics. For example, JavaScript doesn't
have generics, so you have
to generate some fairly hairy
JavaScript. And so if you
look at what other J
and if so, so the
more, you know, you're trying
to maintain an existing language,
the, the bigger, the distances.
It's not that it's one
to one, but it's, it's
like, you know, JavaScript has
certain assumptions about while it's
based type system is. And
so if you're, if your
layer language on top of
that, that's kind of maintains
that same flavor. So it's
like, you know, it's a,
it's an prototype based inheritance
then that that's that installation,
this is less convoluted. It's
less, it's less dramatic. Why
do you think that GWT
has become successful? At least
within, with certainly within Google,
many of their applications are
written in GWT. Also many
are written enclosure while people
on the Microsoft side look
at layers of abstraction like
web forms and, and lament
it. I, I drew a
comparison in my, in my
blog posts that resonated with
some people, but other people
thought I was being intellectually
dishonest. When I said that
this is similar to view
state. And in that, you
know, some large blob comes
down that provides value, but
that value is unclear. I
either accept that this is
there for a reason, or
I lament the fact that
it's there. And I think
that when I see a
giant blob of, of state
management JavaScript code, I am
reminded of view state. And
I feel like certainly not
as a few state apologist,
but someone who says that
someone realizes that view state
provided a purpose and a
value. It seems like web
forms could be expressed in
the same way that, that
GWT and these other service
things are, maybe it was
before its time, or maybe
if it was, maybe it
was, I'm not complete enough
to solve the problem. Yeah.
So I think you w
you're touching up on some
kind of a very interesting
dilemma, really. So the thing
is like when you're abstracting
from the underlying, so when
you're assuming JavaScript is in
assembly language, you're making certain
assumptions that, you know, you're
trusting the compiler to do
work for you. And it's
the same mission. Like when
you're using managed codes, you're,
you're saying, okay, I'm trusting
the system to do garbage
collection for me and jetting
for me. So you're really
kind of, you know, giving
thrust into the, the compiler
and the runtime and, and
it takes care of details
that you don't want to
think about. Now, you can
take the shame analogy in,
in the managed worlds where
people are saying, Oh, but,
you know, I want to
use C or C plus
plus because I want to
have full control over my
memory allocation. I don't want
to rely on a garbage
collector. I, I want to
kind of ride glows through
the metal. And I think
you see the shame thing
here, but JavaScript it's like,
you know, if you're using
something like GWT, you're really
giving away control of a
lot of these aspects to
the compiler where some people
won't have more full control,
they want to be closer
to the metal. So I
think you will have always
have two camps where, you
know, certain people for, you
know, won't, or, you know,
needs to have full control
and, and, and need to
be close to the metal,
whereas others, you know, they,
they, they can work in
a high level language. Now,
I personally believe that if
you look at something like
GWT or what we tried
with Volta, or with script
sharp, is that when you
have a good compiler, just
like with, with C there's
very few people that can
ride at assembly language that
kind of can compete with,
with a good compiler. And
especially, you know, you cannot
beat the, the productivity aspect.
I mean, you, you can
ride out, you can write
more lines of code and
you can be more productive
in a higher level language.
And so it's, it's that
trade off. So sometimes, you
know, and, and just like,
you know, sometimes maybe even
if you're using C sharp,
you might want to write
some, some things in native
code and interrupt with that.
I think, you know, you
will see the same thing
in, in when you're using
JavaScript that you might want
to, you know, dropped down
into Java script to do
something that's going to perform
as critical and, and do
to kind of more higher
level programming in a higher
level language. So do you,
do you think that that,
that the development world online
is, is splitting between those
that wish to write assembler
or in this case, JavaScript
and jQuery, and those who
want a higher level language,
or do you think it's
split more in terms of
there are applications and there
are websites and people will
write their websites and HTML
and JavaScript, and people will
write their applications in something
else. That's another great question.
I think so, as I
said, I think there's there.
This just like a very
multifaceted question, because if you
look at JavaScript, people look
at JavaScript and they, it
looks like a very high
level language. They see curly
braces, these they see functions
and so on. So when,
when we did Volta and
I'm pretty sure that the
GWT people and, and, and
the script chart, people get
the same remarks, do they
say, this is, this is
wrong. You're taking, you know,
ill, which is a low
level language, and you're translating
it into a high level
language, but, you know, Luke's
are deceptive because even if
you look at Microsoft and
Microsoft at the ILD adult
nets, ill or Java class
files, that Luke's like a
low level language, but really,
you know, the fact that
we have things like net
to reflect, or really the
aisle, it looks like a
sham blur, but it's just
a different representation of a
C-sharp or official basic program,
because you can decompile it
very easily. It's just, it's
a different view of, of
the same high level code.
So I would argue that
Java class files or assemblies
are higher level than JavaScript,
but people don't perceive it
like that because JavaScript Luke's
so much like a high
level language. So that there's,
that's one aspect. Then the
other thing that you bring
up is a very good
point is, is the difference
between applications and websites. And
there you get into the
whole business of, you know,
search engine optimization. And so
on this act, when you're
using a search engine, how
do you find your website
or your application? And really,
I think, you know, most,
most websites are, you know,
if your website is not
really static, it's really an
application. If it's doing, you
know, interesting computations. And I
think things will move more
and more to an application,
like experience where, like, if
you, if you look on,
on, on a lot of
phones and you're using like
high level libraries, you don't
really see that this thing
was written in HTML and
JavaScript. It's not a website
anymore. It's not the document.
And, and so I, yeah,
it, this is an interesting
thing. I don't know how
it will play out, but
I think people will want
to have a way where,
you know, the search engine
can find they're there, whether
you call it an application
or, or websites, that is
the way that people find
things besides the app store.
And maybe the app store
is for applications, app stores
are replacing, you know, search
engines because now there's metadata,
that's in the app store,
you search on these things
in a different way. Yeah.
I definitely, I kind of,
I can hear a struggle
in your voice because we
haven't arrived yet. You know,
we're, we're, we're literally at
the inflection point and I
think that's why there's so
much kind of concern and
paranoia and kind of tumbled
happening in the community because,
you know, you're describing that,
you know, soon we'll package
up HTML and JavaScript and
we'll look at it more
as an application. And that
sounds like flash or Silverlight.
I mean, Silverlight is as
a runtime within, within the
browser that is, takes a
manifest of resources and code
and zips it up and
sends it down. The only
difference is that it's, it's,
it's Microsoft's product and not,
not a standard, but at
the same time, people who
are really good at Silverlight
have said that as I,
as I lament issues in
HTML and JavaScript, the several
I, people are like, we
don't have this problem. This
is a solve issue. And
I think that's what happens
when something is designed like
silver light versus something grows
organically over many, many, many
years as HTML and JavaScript
has been. It's going to
be an interesting, interesting ride,
and it'll be even more
interesting to see, are we
going to be able to
declare victory at some point,
or will we, will we
always have this? I'm not
quite finished feeling that, that
the web has. Yeah. That,
that is a good point.
You know, when you, you,
you mentioned silver lights, for
example, and silver lights, you
know, there's no way you
can do view shores, right.
You're right. Click, and then
you get a little pop
up that says silver lights
usually, and there's no view
shores. And so, and again,
yes, there, that's taking this
idea of, you know, it's,
it's really an application that
runs inside the browser. And
that is the, the thing
that I really I'm really
struggling here, because there are
certain things that are where
you kind of browse the
web. It's really like documents
with hyperlinks that you click
on and it's more like
a book or something. Whereas
in other cases, the it's,
it's a mixture. You know,
you have a page that
has, you know, maybe a
map on that or interactive
graphs and visualizations, or you
have things where that's just
purely an obligation. Like, you
know, when you have a
male client LIDAR online outlook,
web access, or Gmail or
Hotmail, that is, you know,
the fact that that runs
in a browser, it's, it
has nothing to do really
with, with a document or
HTML. Right. You're really using
that as, as an application.
I mean, I don't know
whether people will kind of
right. Click on, on PFOA
and hope to learn something
about the coach or even,
you know, viewed that thing
to Seamus as going to
a website. Well, yeah, I
mean, some people split the
web up in terms of
applications and documents. Others might
say, well, there are things
I can do a view
source on and learn something.
And there are things that
I can't, but it's, it's
going to be interesting. Many,
many people believe that the
web was successful because you
source allowed a new person
to learn about how it
worked. And if the entire
web turns into zipped up
obfuscated bundles of something, it's
going to be a little
bit more of a barrier
to entry for the average
person to start to start
playing around. But thank you
so much, Eric, for taking
the time to chat with
me about this, this issue.
I think we don't have
any conclusions, but we've definitely
introduced a lot of new
questions, Which keeps life interesting.
All the questions were answered,
then, you know, what was
there left for us to
do? So I think it's
that every question generates Denmore
questions that keeps life interesting.
It does. It does. Thank
you so much. Eric Meyer for
chatting with me today, and
this has been another episode
of Hansel minutes. We'll see
you again next week.